.\" rubyall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for rubylang (the `ruby` binary).
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every section of the reference in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/rubyall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/rubyall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH RUBYALL 1 "2026-07-23" "rubyrs 0.1.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rubyall \- the rubylang comprehensive reference (invocation, language, architecture,
bytecode VM + Cranelift JIT, LSP, DAP, inline-Rust FFI)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all\-in\-one
.B rubylang
manual, modeled on
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the rubylang reference into a single page so
you can grep with `/`:
.RS 2
.PP
.B 1.  INVOCATION
.RB "\(em " "flags, files, exit status"
.br
.B 2.  LANGUAGE
.RB "\(em " "the Ruby the runtime parses and runs"
.br
.B 3.  ARCHITECTURE
.RB "\(em " "lex \[->] parse \[->] lower \[->] fusevm VM + JIT"
.br
.B 4.  TOOLING
.RB "\(em " "\-\-lsp, \-\-dap, inline-Rust FFI, dumps"
.br
.B 5.  DIAGNOSTICS
.RB "\(em " "error format and common messages"
.RE
.SH 1. INVOCATION
.B ruby
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR runs a Ruby script.
.B \-e \fISRC\fR
executes a one\-liner (repeatable; snippets are joined with newlines),
.B \-I \fIDIR\fR
prepends
.I DIR
to
.BR $LOAD_PATH ,
and
.B \-r \fILIB\fR
requires a library before the script.
.B \-\-lsp
and
.B \-\-dap
speak their protocols over stdio and take no file. See
.BR ruby (1)
for the per\-flag table.
.SH 2. LANGUAGE
rubylang runs Ruby programs outside MRI. It lexes and parses Ruby to an AST, lowers
it to
.B fusevm
bytecode, and runs on the shared JIT; method dispatch, blocks, and object
construction run on a thread\-local
.B RubyHost
heap. The implemented surface includes classes with
.BR super ,
modules and
.BR include ,
exceptions, splat parameters, and the
.B &:sym
block\-pass shorthand \(em checked against reference
.B ruby
by a 35\-snippet differential parity harness. A persistent REPL runs on the same
host.
.SH 3. ARCHITECTURE
.EX
Ruby source \[->] lexer \[->] parser (AST) \[->] lower to fusevm bytecode \[->] fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.EE
.PP
There is no bespoke VM or JIT; arithmetic lowers to native fusevm ops so the tracing
JIT can compile hot loops, while Ruby object semantics are served by the
.B RubyHost
heap. The same fusevm engine hosts strykelang, zshrs, awkrs, vimlrs, and elisprs.
A transparent rkyv bytecode cache and AOP intercepts ride on top.
.SH 4. TOOLING
.SS Language server (\-\-lsp)
.B ruby \-\-lsp
speaks LSP over stdio: completion and hover from the symbol corpus (the same table
that generates
.IR docs/reference.html ),
and diagnostics from the runtime's own parser. It is read\-only; no output reaches
the terminal.
.SS Debugger (\-\-dap)
.B ruby \-\-dap
speaks the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio: line breakpoints, single\-stepping,
a stack trace, and inspection of a frame's locals. Program output is captured and
forwarded as
.B output
events so it never corrupts the protocol channel.
.SS Inline-Rust FFI
A
.B rust { pub extern "C" fn \[u2026] }
block desugars to an internal
.BR __rust_compile ,
compiles to a cached
.B cdylib
on first run (via the shared
.B fusevm
FFI runtime), and its exports become callable by name from Ruby
.RB ( src/rust_ffi.rs ).
.SS Dumps
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
prints the token stream,
.B \-\-dump\-ast
the parsed AST, and
.B \-\-disasm
a fusevm bytecode disassembly \(em each then exits.
.SH 5. DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are written to standard error in Ruby's own exception form. The process
exits non\-zero on an unhandled exception and 0 on success.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ruby (1)
The focused invocation page. Source and issue tracker:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/rubylang
.SH AUTHOR
Part of the fusevm language family.
