.TH RUBY 1 "2026" "rubyrs 0.1.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ruby \- compiled Ruby runtime on the fusevm bytecode VM
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ruby
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fIFILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rubyrs
runs Ruby programs by lexing and parsing to an AST, lowering to
.B fusevm
bytecode, and executing on a shared bytecode VM with a three-tier Cranelift
JIT. Arithmetic lowers to native VM ops; Ruby object semantics are served by a
runtime host.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-e " " \fISRC\fR
Execute a one-liner instead of a file. Repeatable; multiple
.B \-e
snippets are joined with newlines. Trailing arguments become
.BR ARGV .
.TP
.BR \-I " " \fIDIR\fR
Prepend
.I DIR
to
.BR $LOAD_PATH " (repeatable; glued " \-Idir " or detached)."
.TP
.BR \-r " " \fILIB\fR
.B require
.I LIB
before the program runs (repeatable).
.TP
.B \-c
Check syntax only: print
.BR "Syntax OK" ", do not run."
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-W [\fIlevel\fR]
Set the warning level in
.BR $VERBOSE " (" \-W0 " \(-> nil, " \-w / \-W1 " \(-> false, " \-W2 " \(-> true)."
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Set
.BR $DEBUG .
.TP
.B \-S
Search
.B $PATH
for the program file.
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version banner, then run any program.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version banner and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-repl
Start the interactive REPL on a persistent host.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Speak the Language Server Protocol over stdio.
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Speak the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio.
.TP
.B \-\-build " " \fIFILE\fR
Ahead-of-time compile the script's bytecode into the on-disk cache.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-bytecode " " \fIFILE\fR
Print the lowered fusevm bytecode and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens " " \fIFILE\fR
Print the lexer token stream and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast " " \fIFILE\fR
Print the parsed AST and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-disasm " " \fIFILE\fR
Print a fusevm bytecode disassembly listing and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success, 1 on a parse or runtime error (reported to stderr as
.IR "ruby: <reason>" ).
.SH SEE ALSO
Project: https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/rubyrs
